DATA

CANCER WEBSITE RESEARCH

In order to make a successful website, relating to cancer as well as listing many facts and ideas about cancer, one must look at the current successful cancer websites.

Here are the top ten websites for “cancer” when typed into the google search bar

www.webmd.com
www.wikipedia.com
www.cancer.org
www.cancer.gov
www.medicinenet.com
www.medlineplus.gov
www.cancercenter.com
www.cancerresearchuk.org
www.emedicinehealth.com
www.cancercare.org


Domain

Similarities 

First, we can already notice some similarities in the domain, as well as some differences.
For example, many of the domain names have cancer in it, which is a key reason it pops up when a user types in “cancer” into the search bar. 

Differences

We can see the many differences towards the end of the domain. For example, two of the sites have .gov, five sites have .com, and three of the sites have .org.







A Look Into The Top Websites

Now, we can dive into the aspects of each website, to understand the significance of the website. Also, it will allow us to gain some knowledge that could be applied in the creation of our own website.



Web MD

Web MD is a very well known site, used by many students in researching many vast topics, such as cancer, diseases, vaccines, cures, etc. 

To understand the many ideas of the website, we can dive into multiple facets of it, such as its web design, information, and accessibility.

Almost all the sites are by government or national institutes, so it is going to be hard for to compete at that level

I realized that in order to have a successful website, I need to list as much as information about cancer as possible so people can obtain all the information without the need to leave my website.

Make layout basic but still elegant looking. Make all tabs and information easily accessible so people do not have to search all over the place.

Create trafficking so page pops up, and make a .net probably(whichever is cheaper).


RESEARCH GATHERED FROM PLATFORMS

First, lets go from broad to specific so we can gather as much information as possible. 
Ok, what is cancer?

Cancer, by the definition of (CANCER.GOV), is a “A term for diseases in which abnormal cells divide without control and can invade nearby tissues”. I should define cancer in one section, as many people have heard of cancer but do not know the physiological details of it.


What is cancer?

Cancer is a disease caused by an uncontrolled division of abnormal cells in a part of the body. 	This means that a cell divided too much during the cell cycle. 

Cancer is a broad term because there are more than 100 types of cancer. So cancer consists of many types of diseases that affect all the organs in the body. 

Normal cell cycle vs Cancer cell cycle

Normal cell cycle- the cell divides when needed and stops when it doesn’t need to divide anymore 

Cancer cell cycle- cell continuously divides even if it needs to or doesn’t need to

Cancer cells have different growth factors that normal cells

Why can cancer cells divide like this?

In all cells, there is an enzyme called telomerase. 

An enzyme is a catalyst that speeds up chemical reactions

Telomerase shortens DNA Replication. 

In normal cells, the Telomerase wears down, and new telomerase is added.

In cancer cells, the Telomerase never wears down, and it protects the cancer cell from fusions that would show the DNA Damage to the other cells in the body.

If the DNA damage is showed to other cells, then cancer would never occur and the other cells would repair the DNA damage occurred.

So after the telomerase step, the normal cell usually goes through the p53 receptor, which checks if their is DNA damage and takes the appropriate steps.

Normal cell cycle- if their is DNA damage, then the p53 senses it and two things could happen.
First way
it could arrest the cell, which keeps it from moving or doing anything else

After it arrests the cell, it could do a DNA repair and then restart the cell cycle.

Or if it cannot repair the DNA damage, it goes through apoptosis, which is a programmed cell death. It kills the cell and creates a new one by dividing another cell.
But in a cancer cell, the p53 is mutated.
When the p53 receptor is mutated, that means that it cannot sense that their is DNA Damage, and the receptor is useless. The cell continues to divide rapidly and uncontrollably. 
After the cell goes through the p53 phase, it continues to grow rapidly and uncontrollably.
Afterwards, it goes through to main steps : Angiogenesis and Metastasis


Metastasis
 when cancer cells migrate to other parts of the body, affecting other organs and functions.

Angiogenesis
when the cell promotes growth of new blood vessels(simply, it gives the tumor oxygen and nutrients to stay alive, as it is a living thing)

The cancer keeps spreading until it causes all your vital organs to shut down, causing death

Why we have not found a cure for cancer?
Like said before, cancer does not consist of a single disease. 

There would not be a cure for all cancers, as all cancers are different with each other.

Different cancers would need different cures, and it would be nearly impossible to find a universal cure for one cancer, in my opinion.

And it is extremely hard to find a cure for one cancer, as no one has found one yet.

As soon as researchers learn everything about each cancer, then the likelihood of it being curable increases.

 For example, since testicular cells are sensitive to chemotherapy and other drugs, the cancer cells die, which is why 98 percent of people who have testicular cancer survive

Although there has not been a cure, doctors have been using different methods to slow cancer growth

One method is chemotherapy, which is probably the most prevalent and known method.
Chemotherapy is a way to use anti-cancer drugs to stop the growth of cancer or to reduce symptoms. 

Radiation therapy shines radiation at tumor and cancer cells to kill them, but has risk and can affect normal cells.

Why doesn’t chemotherapy cure cancer
Chemo kills fast growing cells, like cancer cells. But it also kills fast growing normal cells, like hair cells and blood cells. 
Think of it as an algorithm, the drug coding says kill all fast cells, and it does that, but it also affects every fast growing cell, not just the cancer cells. 
If we would have found an algorithm that only targeted cancer cells, there would have been a high chance to cure cancer
But so far, we haven't discovered an algorithm yet.


How many different types of Cancer are there?
Personally, If I was looking at a cancer website, then I would scroll to the specific cancer I want to know about, so we would have to split sections that regard each cancer. First, we should list and research about all of the main cancers, then dive into the more rare, less common cancers.
Types of cancer: So first, we can split the cancers into two different categories
Sarcomas and Carcinomas.
Sarcomas
cancer in fat, blood vessels, nerves, bones, muscles, deep skin tissues and cartilage. Are more rare(cancercenter.com)
Carcinomas
cancer in the organs, such as kidneys, liver, lungs, brain etc. Are more common

Since Carcinomas are more common, we should start researching them before we research Sarcomas.

Lets go over all of the main organs first, then we can list the cancers associated with them.(education.gov), we will split it up into three different categories for each specific cancer, Cell Development, Symptoms, Diagnosis/Treatment, and Demographic
Brain(WebMD)
Astrocytomas
Development- starts in the cerebrum, specifically from a cell called an astrocyte(account for most cells in brain). Astrocytes help protect neurons and aid in sending messages between them.(BRAINTUMORCHARITY.ORG)
Symptoms- constant headaches, double or blurred vision, vomiting, early satiation, personality changes, loss of cognitive ability, seizures, speech problems(AANS.ORG)
Diagnosis/Treatment- Diagnosis can appear in four different stages 
Stage 1- usually benign tumors, removed with surgery(common in children)
Stage 2- slow progression of the tumor, usually surgery but radio and chemo considered because surgery can be very dangerous because it can involve essential parts of brain involved for aspects such as speech and walking- young adults
Stage 3- start to become more malignant and aggressive, use of surgery followed by radiotherapy and chemotherapy- adults
Stage 4- little more aggressive and malignant than grade 3, same treatment as stage 3- adults(AANS.ORG)
Demographics(https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/anaplastic-astrocytoma/)
Affects males slightly more than females
Affects 0.005-0.008 of population(5-8 people per 100,000 thousand)
More common in adults than children
In adults, affects adults between 30-50 most commonly
In children, affects children between ages 5-9
No race is the most affected

Meningiomas-(ucla neurosurgery, cancercenter.com)
Development
first starts growing/developing in the meningeal tissues, which are tissues that surround the brain and spinal cord. They grow on the surface of the brain, and push the brain away instead of growing in it. Can develop to become really large
Symptoms- persistent headaches, blurred vision, seizures, weak feelings in arms/legs, numbness, speech problems 
Diagnosis/ Treatment(cancer.net, mayoclinic.org)
-Different grades of meningiomas, split into three grades
Grade 1: tumor grows very slowly, not very alarming and can be removed with surgery
Grade 2: becomes a typical meningioma due to high growing rates, surgery could be used but chemo and radio considered.
Grade 3:tumor spreads rapidly, out of control and is called a anaplastic meningioma. Most likely chemo or radio therapy.
Demographics(https://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/meningioma/statistics)
More common in women than in men
Very rare in children, uncommon
More common in adults, specifically adults 
Black men and women most affected

Oligodendrogliomas(the brain tumor charity) 
Development- starts in the oligodendrocytes, which make up the covering that protects the nerves in the brain.
Symptoms- seizures, headaches, abnormalities in normal brain function, nausea, problems with vision, muscle weakness/abnormalities, change in sensory functions(the brain tumour charity.org)
Diagnosis/Treatment
Divided into 2 grades, grade 2 and grade 3
Grade 2- known as a lower grade, slow growing
Grade 3- known as high grade, referred to as anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and are very fast growing and almost always malignant
Demographics
Affects males more than females(2:1 to 3:2 ratio)
Affects adults more than children(6-12 percent in children, rest in adults)
Most common in adults between 30-40
Race is NA

Lungs(MEDICINENET.ORG)
Three different types
adenocarcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas, large cell carcinomas
Adenocarcinomas

Development(https://lungevity.org/for-patients-caregivers/lung-cancer-101/types-of-lung-cancer/lung-adenocarcinoma)

Lung adenocarcinomas tend to develop in the smaller airways of the lung, such as the bronchioles. Generally, it is located towards the outside of the lung rather than the inside. Specifically, within the lung, the adenocarcinoma develops in the glandular cells, which are present in many other organs besides the lungs.

Symptoms
(https://www.verywellhealth.com/lung-adenocarcinoma-symptoms-treatment-and-prognosis-2249363)

Common symptoms of lung adenocarcinoma include fatigue, chronic cough, coughing up blood, subtle shortness of breath, upper and back chest pain. 


Diagnosis/Treatment(https://lungevity.org/for-patients-caregivers/lung-cancer-101/types-of-lung-cancer/lung-adenocarcinoma)
In lung adenocarcinomas, there are five different stages 
Stage 0- cancer has not spread outside the bronchioles
Stage 1- split up into 1A and 1B, but similar diagnosis, cancer has grown in size, not spread to any lymph nodes, and has not metastasized. For 1B, cancer may have spread more in the lung and caused lung collapse or swelling
Stage 2- Split up into two stages, 2A and 2B.  
2A tumors are slightly larger than stage 1 tumors, but has not spread to any lymph nodes. They may have spread into the lungs and cause the lung to well or collapse.
2B tumors 


Stage 3
Stage 4


Squamous cell carcinomas
A slow growing type of lung cancer almost always caused by smoking. 
Development



Large cell carcinomas
tend to grow quickly, thus making it easy to metastasize quickly. Another example of a carcinoma where most of the people either are present smoker or past smokers.
Bronchial carcinoids
Only account for up to 5 percent of lung cancers, very rare form of lung cancer.
Able to metastasize, but less harmful because since it is a carcinoid it grows way slower so detection is way earlier


Liver
Four main types of liver cancer
Hepatocellular carcinoma
most common type of liver cancer
accounts for 75% of all liver cancers
cancer first develops in the hepatocytes(predominant liver cells)
it is able to metastasize to other parts of the body, like pancreas, stomach, etc.
Can be hereditary, but it is most often caused due to bad livers from alcohol drinking/abuse
Cholangiocarcinoma 
known as bile duct cancer(name comes from the fact that it develops in the small, bile ducts of the liver)
accounts for 10-20 percent of all liver cancers(significantly less than hepatocellular carcinoma)
there are two different types of cholangiocarcinoma
intrahepatic and extrahepatic carcinoma 
intrahepatic carcinoma is where the cancer occurs in the section of the bile ducts inside of the liver
extrahepatic carcinoma is where the cancer occurs in the section of the bile ducts outside of the liver.

Liver angiosarcoma
remember, sarcoma is more rare form of liver cancer, as it is a sarcoma.
It begins in the liver’s blood vessels 
Most patients die within two years of their diagnosis
Hepatoblastoma
extremely rare form of liver cancer.
Chemo and surgery help this cancer, as it has 90% + survival rate 
Found mainly in children 3 and under.

Bladder
Three main types of bladder cancer(CANCER.NET)

Urothelial carcinoma
accounts for 90% of all bladder cancers and 10-15 % of kidney cancers in adults
Begins in the urothelial cells, which are cells that line up in the urinary tract(renal pelvis, ureters, and the urethra.
Also known as transitional cell carcinoma of TCC

Squamous cell carcinoma 
Squamous cells develop in bladder lining due to irritation or inflammation
Over time, these cells could become cancerous
Account for only 4% percent of all bladder cancers

Bladder adenocarcinoma
accounts for only 2% of all bladder cancers
Develops from glandular cells——cells found in the cervix and in the lining of the uterus.


Kidneys(Cancer.net)
Five main types of kidney cancer

Renal cell carcinoma
Most common types of kidney cancer(makes about 85% of the diagnoses)
Develops in the proximal renal tubules----these tubules make up the kidneys’ filter system----over thousands of these make up the system

Urothelial carcinoma
Very similar to respective bladder cancer(starts in the renal pelvis, more specifically the urothelial cells).
Accounts for 10-15 % of kidney cancer cases.
Treated very similar to bladder cancer 

Kidney sarcoma
Rare, develops in the capsule/ surrounding fat of the kidney(soft, thin layer of connective tissue).
Surgery treatment, likely to come back after first surgery

Wilms tumor
In children, more success in treatment
Radiation and chemotherapy treatment rather than surgery

Lymphoma
Enlarged lymph nodes called lymphadenopathy(neck, chest, abdominal cavity).
Special case, could appear as large mass in kidney, could include regional lymph nodes
Chemo over surgery.

Heart (mayo clinic)
Extremely rare
Most come from metastasis(cancer usually doesn’t form in the heart)
For example, lung cancer can metastasize to the periodical sac of the heart and continue to grow, or can be spread from the bloodstream.
Can occur from cancers such as breast cancer, kidney cancer, lung cancer, leukemia, lymphoma and melanoma, among others.
Carcinoid cancer- affects the heart valves by producing excess hormones
Treatment is very difficult because using chemotherapy or radiation can damage crucial parts of the heart.

Stomach(MacMillan)
Three different categories of stomach cancer: soft tissue sarcomas, lymphomas, and neuroendocrine or carcinoid tumors.
95% of stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas; begin in the glandular cells of the stomach lining
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours
Develops in the digestive tract
Soft-tissue sarcoma
Surgery main treatment, also use tablets that act as growth inhibitors

Mucosa associated lymphoid tissue(MALT lymphoma)
Occurs in the mucosa, which is a moist tissue in some of the linings of organs, such as nose, mouth, lungs, and digestive tract.
Starts in the body organs, not lymph nodes
Starts in the b cells of the lymphocytes, not the t cells. 
For stomach cancer, it is called a gastric malt but it can occur in other organs a non-gastric malt.
Common symptoms are indigestion or heartburn 
Grows very slowly, early diagnosis
More common in older people, is an aftermath from Sjogren’s syndrome, which is an immune system disorder from dry eyes and dry mouth(decreased tears and saliva)
Neuroendocrine tumors(Nets).
More common in older people(60 and above)
Symptoms
Stomach pain
Bowel irritation/changes
Skin flushing 
Out of breath
Loss of appetite
Weight loss
Common ways to diagnose- urine tests, blood test, or biopsies.

Determinants of NET seriousness
Origin
Size
Has it metastasized?
Looks
Symptoms



Intestines
Colon cancer:
Cancer of the large intestine
Starts of as benign masses known as adenomatous polyps, but can become malignant(colon cancer).
Regular screening required because little to no symptoms for colon cancer
Symptoms
Constipation or diarrhea
Rectal bleeding or blood in stool
Weight loss
Weak feeling, tiredness, fatigueness
These symptoms usually occur in the later part of colon cancer, so it is important to get a screening sometimes to make sure you don’t have colon cancer

Small intestine cancer(five types) 

Background information for small intestine
Cancer split into four stages, where stage 1 indicates less spread than stage 4 and typically less serious
Four layers(outermost to innermost)
Subserosa and serosa- thin, outermost layers of small intestine
Thick muscle layers(muscularis propria)- layer of muscle to direct food
Submucosa- right beneath the mucosa
Mucosa- 3 parts, which are epithelial cells at the top layer, lamina propria, a thin connective tissue, and a thin layer of muscle(muscularis mucosa)
Adenocarcinoma(cancer.org)
Gastric Adenocarcinoma- starts in the glandular cells
Accounts for 90% of stomach cancers
Symptoms generally don’t show up until metastasis.
Symptoms include:
 Anorexia and weight loss
Abdominal pain, not very specific, many can believe this is just constipation, diarrhea, cramps, etc
Nausea and vomiting
Becoming full very quickly, loss of appetite
Blood from vomiting or feces

Sarcoma(cancer.gov)
There is a sarcoma leiomyosarcoma, which can arise from smooth muscle cells in the pelvis, uterus, or abdomen.
Development- starts for smooth muscle cells, in stomach’s case, from smooth muscle cells in the stomach. This disease usually occurs in the ileum of the small intestine.

Symptoms- 
Anorexia and weight loss
Abdominal pain, not very specific, many can believe this is just constipation, diarrhea, cramps, etc
Nausea and vomiting
Becoming full very quickly, loss of appetite
Blood from vomiting or feces



Diagnosis/Treatment- 

In order to treat this disease, most doctors perform surgery, minority receive adjuvant therapy. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11456049

Carcinoid tumors

Development
These two tumors are characterized by slow growth and can metastasize to other places, specifically the liver.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor

	Development
Forms in the walls of the gastrointestinal tract. Can further be classified as benign or malignant. 

Lymphoma

	Development
Begins in the immune system. 



Pancreas
Breasts
Prostate
Vaginal/Penal/Anal





